Adds documentation about function contracts (#6185)
diffblue/cbmc: doc/cprover-manual/requires-and-ensures-clauses.md

# Requires \& Ensures Clauses

### Definition

```c
__CPROVER_requires(bool cond)
```

The _requires_ clause specify the preconditions of a function, i.e., the minimal
requirements to properly execute an operation. Developers may see the _requires_
clause as all the caller's obligations when invoking this fuction.

```c
__CPROVER_ensures(bool cond)
```

The _ensures_ clause specify the postconditions of a function, i.e., all the
properties over arguments or global variables that a function guarantees at the

> an of the operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
end of the operation.
```

> Also, notice that one may call

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, notice that one may specify
```

multiple instances of `__CPROVER_requires` and `__CPROVER_ensures` clauses, which will be combined together in a single conjunction.

### Parameters

The _requires_ clause accepts a Boolean expression over the arguments of a function and/or global variables, including CBMC primitive functions (e.g., [Memory Predicates]()). Similarly, _ensures_ clauses also accept Boolean expressions and CBMC primitives, but also [History Variables]().

**Important.** Developers may call functions inside _requires_ and _ensures_
clauses to better write larger specifications (e.g., predicates). However, at
this point CBMC does not enforce such functions to be without

> side effects (i.e., do not modify any local or global state). This will be supported in future versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
side effects (i.e., do not modify any local or global state). This will be checked in future versions.
```

### Semantics

> The semantics of a _requires_ clause *r* of a given function *f* can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The semantics of _ensures_ and _requires_ clauses can be
```

understood in two contexts: enforcement and replacement. 
To illustrate these two perspectives, consider the following implementation of the `sum` function.

```c
int sum(uint32_t* a, uint32_t* b, uint32_t* out)

> /* Precondition */

Reviewer: ```suggestion
/* Preconditions */
```

__CPROVER_requires(__CPROVER_is_fresh(a, sizeof(*a)))
__CPROVER_requires(__CPROVER_is_fresh(b, sizeof(*b)))
__CPROVER_requires(__CPROVER_is_fresh(out, sizeof(*out)))
/* Postconditions */
__CPROVER_ensures(__CPROVER_return_value == SUCCESS || __CPROVER_return_value == FAILURE)
__CPROVER_ensures((__CPROVER_return_value == SUCCESS) ==> (*out == (*a + *b)))
{
    const uint64_t result = ((uint64_t) *a) + ((uint64_t) *b);
    if (result > UINT32_MAX) return FAILURE;
    *out = (uint32_t) result;
    return SUCCESS;
}
```

#### Enforcement

In order to determine whether _requires_ and _ensures_ clauses are a sound
characterization of the behavior of a function *f*, CBMC will try to check them as follows:

> 1. Considers all arguments and global variables as non-determinisc values;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Considers all arguments and global variables as non-deterministic values;
```

2. Assumes all preconditions specified in the `__CPROVER_requires` clauses;
4. Calls the implementation of function *f*;
5. Asserts all postconditions described in the `__CPROVER_ensures` clauses.

In our example, `sum` function will be instrumented as follows

```c
/* Function Contract Enforcement */
int add_overflow(uint32_t a, uint32_t b, uint32_t* out)
{
  __CPROVER_assume(out != NULL);
  

>   int return_value_add_overflow = __CPROVER_contracts_original_add_overflow(a, b, out);

Reviewer: Why not name the enforcement function as `__CPROVER_contracts_enforce_add_overflow` and have this line as:
```c
  int return_value_add_overflow = add_overflow(a, b, out);
```
i.e. not rename the original function, but have a new name for the enforcing function.

(We have an open issue regarding this.)

Author: Yes, I agree. However, shouldn't we update the documentation only once we implement this change?

Reviewer: You are right. Let's change this after we implement the fix.

1. Adds assertions for all preconditions specified in the `__CPROVER_requires`
   clauses; 
2. Adds non-deterministic assignments for each symbol listed in the
   `__CPROVER_assigns` clause (see [Assigns Clauses](assigns-clause.md) Section for details);
3. Assumes all postconditions described in the `__CPROVER_ensures` clauses;

In our example, consider that a function `foo` may call `sum`.

```c
int foo()
{
	uint32_t* a = malloc(sizeof(*a));
	uint32_t* b = malloc(sizeof(*a));
	uint32_t out;
	int rval = sum(a, b, &out);
	if (rval == SUCCESS) 
		return out;
	return rval;
}
```

CBMC will use the function contract in place of the function implementation wherever the function is called.

```c
int foo()
{
	uint32_t* a = malloc(sizeof(*a));
	uint32_t* b = malloc(sizeof(*a));
	uint32_t out;
	
	
	/* Function Contract Replacement */
	/* Precondition */
	__CPROVER_assert(__CPROVER_is_fresh(a, sizeof(*a)), "Check requires clause");
	__CPROVER_assert(__CPROVER_is_fresh(b, sizeof(*b)), "Check requires clause");
	__CPROVER_assert(__CPROVER_is_fresh(out, sizeof(*out)), "Check requires clause");
	
	/* Writable Set */

> 	*out = nondet_uint32_t();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	*(&out) = nondet_uint32_t();
```

	
	/* Postconditions */

>    int return_value_add_overflow = nondet_int();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       int return_value_add_overflow = nondet_int();
```
